# offline-online-preconditioning
This repocitory contains a Python implementation to an offline-online based domain decomposition strategy for randomly perturbed multiscale coefficients. The code reproduces the numerical experiments presented in the paper "Subspace decomposition with defect diffusion coefficient" by Dilini Kolombage, Axel Målqvist and Barbara Verfürth. This code is written by Dilini Kolombage.
```
# https://github.com/DKolombage/offline-online-preconditioning
# Copyright holder: Dilini Kolombage
# License: BSD 2-Clause License (http://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause)
```

## Setup
This setup works with a Ubuntu system. The following packages are required (tested versions):
 - python (v3.10.4)
 - numpy (v2.2.6)
 - scipy (v1.15.3)
 - matplotlib (v3.10.6)
 
First clone this repo with git. Then, build and activate a python3 virtual environment with

```
python3 -m venv env
. env/bin/activate
```

Now install all the required python packages listed above. Next, to visualize or regenerate the data, first change into the correct folder 'offline-online-preconditioning':

```
cd offline-online-preconditioning
```
Disclaimer! The re-generation of these experiments may take quite a while. While the visulizations are immediate, the regenerations of data from the scratch took us several hours.

## Reproduction of experiments
You could reproduce the data sets for the results given in the manuscript. The following files contain the main algorithms, analysis and the plots to run the experiments.
 1. Utility files
    - ``fem.py`` $\to$ assembles the necessary finite element matrices.
    - ``world.py`` $\to$ defines the World and Patch class.
    - ``coef.py`` $\to$ localizes a coefficient.
    - ``util.py`` $\to$ codes related to index manipulation.
    - ``Reference_solver.py`` $\to$ solves the finite-element-problem.
    - ``build_coefficient.py`` $\to$ builds the coefficient pattern.
    -  ``error_metrics.py``  $\to$ defines the error norms used in the erperiments.

 2. Main Algorithm files
    - ``Direct_DD_util.py`` $\to$ contains the code needed for Direct-DD preconditioner.
    - ``offline_data.py`` $\to$ offline-stage computations.
    - ``online_data.py`` $\to$ online-stage computations.
    - ``patch_data.py`` $\to$ computes online combinations for all patches. 
    - ``coarse_data.py`` $\to$ coarse-level computations including offline-online coarse assembly.
    - ``main_algorithms.py`` $\to$ main algorithms for solving the problem using Direct-DD, ND-DD and OO-DD preconditioners in built-in pcg solver.

3. Run Experiments
   
   To reproduce the data from Section 6.1 - 6.2, run the following for each defect models: defect inclusion, L-shaped defect-inclusion and shifted-defect inclusion. The  data will be saved in a default 'test' folder. Change parameters such as $\alpha, \beta$ accordingly. 
   - ``Exp_Incl.py`` $\to$ Inclusion model. 
   - ``Exp_InclLshape.py`` $\to$  L-shaped-defect model.
   - ``Exp_Inclshift.py`` $\to$  shifted-defect model.

4. Analyse and plot data
   - ``DataAnalysis_Errors.py`` $\to$ computes $L^2, H^1$ and 'energy' norm errors and saves the plot for a given data folder from (3).
   - ``DataAnalysis_Iterations.py`` $\to$ computes the average iterations against defect probabilities for a given data folder from (3) for all contrasts considered.
   - ``DataAnalysisStatistical_1 / _2.py`` $\to$ Compute statistical information and saves in csv.

5. Operator level data.
   The following files only concerns for Section 6.3. 
   - ``BMain.py`` $\to$ Main algorithms only for the preconditioners. Do not solve the problem in a pcg solver.
   - ``BRun.py`` $\to$ Compute and save preconditioners for each realization. Run for all given p-value in an independent p-folder. Also plot the relative-RMSE error against p-values.
   For quick visualization and access to statistical information: 
   - ``BPP.py`` $\to$ compute and save the relative RMSE errors for each p-value from the saved data in the root folder generated by ``BRun.py`` for a random vector.
   - ``Bplot`` $\to$ plot the errors produced in ``BPP.py``.

Some parts of the code in fem.py, world.py, util.py and coef.py are influenced by the work of Fredrik Hellman and Tim Keil. For further details of the terminology and the linear data storage used in this implementation, please refer to their ``README.md`` file available at: 'https://github.com/fredrikhellman/gridlod/blob/0ed4c096df75040145978d48c5307ef5678efed3/README.md'. The ``build_coefficient.py`` is build upon a code developed by Barbara Verfürth and can be found in 'https://github.com/BarbaraV/gridlod-random-perturbations'.

## Visualization of results
All data from the experiments are available at the `data` folder as .npz-files and can be easily visualize without generating the data (vhange the respective folders as shown below). The already generated images can also be found in the respective folders.
1. To visualize Figure 6.1, run
   ``DataAnalysis_Iterations.py``  with EXP_DIRS = ["data/Incl/cnt_10/","data/Incl/cnt_100/","data/Incl/cnt_500/",]
2. To visualize Figure 6.2, run
    ``DataAnalysis_Errors.py`` with EXP_DIR = "data/Incl/cnt_500/".
3. To visualize Figure 6.4, run
   ``DataAnalysis_Iterations.py``  with EXP_DIRS = ["data/InclLshape/cnt_10/","data/InclLshape/cnt_100/","data/InclLshape/cnt_500/",]
4. To visualize Figure 6.5, run
   ``DataAnalysis_Errors.py`` with EXP_DIR = "data/InclLshape/cnt_500/".
3. To visualize Figure 6.6, run
   ``DataAnalysis_Iterations.py``  with EXP_DIRS = ["data/InclShift/cnt_10/","data/InclShift/cnt_100/",] and TITLES = [r"$\alpha=0.1,\ \beta=1$",r"$\alpha=0.1,\ \beta=10$",]
5. To visualize Figure 6.7, run
   ``DataAnalysis_Errors.py``  with EXP_DIR = "data/InclShift/cnt_500/".

6. To visualize Figure 6.8, run
   ``Bplot.py`` with the command '' in the terminal.
   Note that, only the data files generated by ``BPP.py`` are included in this repocitory to allow the visualization. The data sets produced by ``BRun.py`` are not uploaded due to their large size.
Apart from the visualization of the errors, you can also reproduce the coefficient visualizations from the paper (Figures 1.1 and 6.3) using
```
coefficient_plots.py
```
These images are completely independent from the other experiments.

## Note
This code is meant to illustrate the numerical methods presented in the paper. It is not optimized in any way, in particular no parallelization at the patch-level is implemented. 

